# Celer overview [🌍中文](../zh-CH/README.md)

&emsp;&emsp;Celer is a very lightweight C/C++ package manager written in Go. The name "Celer" is inspired by the vision of being C/C++'s accelerator. Celer is explicitly positioned as a non-intrusive CMake assistant for any CMake projects. It is designed to make it easy for developers to manage and compile third-party libraries with only TOML files.

# The background of Celer

&emsp;&emsp;CMake has become the mainstream build system for compiling C/C++ projects, particularly for cross-compiling. While CMake excels at managing the build process—including configuration, compilation, and installation—it primarily focuses on locating dependencies (via **find_package**) rather than handling higher-level package management tasks. In real-world development, many additional tedious tasks fall outside CMake's responsibilities, such as: **clone repos and setup build tools**, **organize dependencies between third-party libraries**, **setup cross-compilation environment**, etc.  
&emsp;&emsp;In fact, the core functionality of Celer is to dynamically generate a **toolchain_file.cmake** as required. Within this file, it configures all required build tools with relative paths, and also specifies the library search paths to isolate system libraries from being found. This means that all the work required  is handled by Celer before generating the toolchain_file.cmake, this is one of the [**REASONS**](./docs/en-US/why_reinvent_celer.md) why Celer was reinvented, rather than using other C/C++ package managers.

# Key features

Celer now has below key features:

### 1. Automatically downloads and configures build tools  

&emsp;&emsp;It automatically downloads and configures tools without any configuration, like **toolchain**, **sysroot**, **CMake**, **ninja**, **msys2**, and **strawberry-perl** based on the selected platform and target libraries.

### 2. Support hosting of libraries building with common build tools

&emsp;&emsp;In the **port.toml** file of each third-party library version directory, you can specify the **build_system** field as **cmake**, **makefiles**, **ninja**, **meson**, etc., to compile with different build tools.

### 3. Support generating CMake configs for non-CMake-based libraries

&emsp;&emsp;Celer can generate CMake configs for any libraries, especially for libraries that not build by CMake, then you can **find_package** them easily.

### 4. Support precise build artifacts cache managerment

&emsp;&emsp;Celer supports precise build artifact management. Currently, you can configure the **cache_dir** in **celer.toml** to store and access artifacts in a shared folder on the local network. This is intended to avoid redundant compilation of source code and improve development efficiency. Furthermore, Celer supports retrieving the artifact of a library without its source code. This is quite useful for some private libraries.

### 5. Support multi-Project Management and Customization of Third-Party Libraries

&emsp;&emsp;Celer supports multi-project management, allowing project-specific customization of third-party libraries, including version and compilation options. It also enables the management of internal libraries within each project's folder.

### 6. Support quick deployment

&emsp;&emsp;Celer supports quick deployment of projects with a single command. Celer will automatically handle the compilation and installation of all dependencies. After that, a `toolchain_file.cmake` will be generated, you can use it to develop your project.

### 7. Support switching between `Dev` mode and `CI/CD` mode

- **DEV mode**: `toolchain_file.cmake` will be generated by `celer deploy` command, it can be used directly in project development, then you can choose any IDE to develop your project.   
- **CI/CD mode**: You can also configure your project in **conf/project** to integrate with CI/CD.

# Get started

We have docs to guide you in using Celer:

- [Quick start.](./quick_start.md)
- [How to create a new platform.](./cmd_create.md#1-create-a-new-platform)
- [How to create a new project.](./cmd_create.md#2-create-a-new-project)
- [How to create a new port.](./cmd_create.md#3-create-a-new-port)

Advanced features:

- [Generate cmake configs.](./introduce_generate_cmake_config.md)
- [Cache build artifacts.](./introduce_cache_management.md)

Supported commands:

| Command                               | Description                                                            |
| ------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [about](./cmd_about.md)               | About Celer.                                                           |
| [autoremove](./cmd_autoremove.md)     | Tidy up installation directory - removing project's unnecessary files. |
| [clean](./cmd_clean.md)               | Remove build cache and clean repo for packages or projects.            |
| [configure](./cmd_configure.md)       | Configure platform or project.                                         |
| [create](./cmd_create.md)             | Create a platform, project or port.                                    |
| [deploy](./cmd_deploy.md)             | Deploy with selected platform and project.                             |
| [init](./quick_start.md#3-setup-conf) | Init with conf repo.                                                   |
| [install](./cmd_install.md)           | Install a package.                                                     |
| [integrate](./cmd_integrate.md)       | Integrate tab completion.                                              |
| [remove](./cmd_remove.md)             | Remove a package.                                                      |
| [search](./cmd_search.md)             | Search matched ports.                                                  |
| [tree](./cmd_tree.md)                 | Show the dependencies of a port or a project.                          |
| [update](./cmd_update.md)             | Update conf repo, ports config repo or third-party repo.               |

# Contribute

&emsp;&emsp;Celer is an open source project, and is thus built with your contributions. Celer is consist of two parts: [celer](https://github.com/celer-pkg/celer.git) and [ports](https://github.com/celer-pkg/ports.git), you can contribute any of them.

# License

&emsp;&emsp;The code in this repository is licensed under the MIT License. The libraries provided by ports are licensed under the terms of their original authors.
